[Music]
now you've probably seen Hollywood
movies where a hole in the side of a
plane causes utter chaos food trays and
bags flying seat belts unable to keep
passengers in place luckily in reality
small damage to the fuselage won't have
such dramatic consequences but a big
opening and a plain side will so would
you believe me if I told you a pilot
managed to land a plane with much of its
roof torn completely off buckle up at
1:25 p.m. on April 28th 1988 a 19 year
old Boeing 737 that belonged to Aloha
Airlines left Hilo International Airport
and headed for Honolulu the plane was
named after Queen Liliuokalani who was
the last sovereign monarch of the
Kingdom of Hawaii on that day the
aircraft already had three short flights
from Honolulu to Hilo Maui and Kauai all
of the trips were regular and uneventful
the weather was calm and it seemed like
nothing could go wrong
the captain was experienced pilot Robert
shorn steamer 44 years old who had 6700
flight hours in the Boeing 737 as for
the first officer it was Madeline
Tompkins 36 years old who had flown more
than 3,500 miles in the very same Boeing
model early in the morning still in
Honolulu the first officer had conducted
the regular pre-flight inspection and
announced that the plane was ready for
the flight at 11:00 a.m. the plane left
Honolulu and was headed for Maui and
then to Hilo when the plane arrived at
this destination the pilots didn't leave
the cockpit or inspect the aircraft from
the outside after all it wasn't a
requirement and they didn't have to do
it following schedule the plane started
the last leg of the routine round-trip
at 1:25 p.m. there were 95 people on
board the aircraft
89 passengers two pilots three flight
attendants and an FAA traffic controller
who stayed in the observer seat in the
cockpit
after a normal takeoff and ascent the
plane got to the usual cruising altitude
of 24,000 feet and then at about 148
p.m. 26 miles away from Kahului Maui the
unexpected happened those who were in
the cockpit heard a loud whooshing sound
and a crack following by the deafening
sound of wind seconds later
apparently a small part of the roof on
the left side tore loose which led to
the explosive decompression of the plane
but the worst thing was that the
decompression caused a huge section of
the airplanes roof to tear off
completely the length of the missing
part was eighteen and a half feet long
and that was the aircraft skin that
covered the plane from the cockpit back
to the fore wing area at first the
pilots didn't realize what had happened
the first officer who was in control of
the aircraft at that moment felt her
head jerked backwards and she noticed
debris and gray pieces of insulation
flying chaotically around the cockpit
when the captain turned his hat he saw
that the cockpit door had disappeared
and instead of the first-class ceiling
he was staring at the clear blue sky the
plane started to roll from side to side
and it was becoming increasingly harder
to control everybody who was in the
cockpit immediately put on their oxygen
masks and the captain took over the
aircraft
he brought the speedbrakes into action
and began an urgent descent toward the
nearest airport which was on Maui Island
luckily all the passengers were in their
seats at the moment when the accident
happened and since the seatbelt sign was
still on everyone had their seat belts
fastened however all three flight
attendants were standing along the
aircraft aisle the one who was closest
to the front of the plane was swept out
through the hole in the roof the other
two were thrown to the floor by a
forceful jerk but while one of them
really hard and lost consciousness the
other started to crawl along the aisle
in an attempt to help passengers and
calm them down at the same time the
pilots were trying to contact air
traffic control and signal and emergency
to make matters worse they couldn't hear
each other and had to use gestures to
communicate they also didn't know
whether their radio work and whether
they had managed to deliver their
message the flight controls were
sluggish and loose and the captain had
difficulty controlling the play
meanwhile the first officer was dealing
with communication and assisting the
captain it turned out that the
controller hadn't been receiving the
cruise messages until the aircraft
descended to an altitude of 14,000 feet
only then the signal got through and
Maui tower started urgent preparations
for an emergency landing what the
problem was at that time in case of
emergency the airport control tower had
to dial 911 else on top of that the
controller didn't catch that passengers
and crew members would need medical help
after all the crew only announced that
they had experienced a rapid
decompression which didn't reveal the
entire horror of the situation in the
meantime the plane had already dropped
to a height of 10,000 feet above sea
level the captain removed his oxygen
mask and withdrew the speed breaks the
plane was moving toward runway 2 of
Kahului Airport following the captain's
command the first officer lowered the
landing gear but the indicator light
didn't come on that could mean either
they had a bad life or they had serious
problems with the nose gear but that
wasn't the only problem as the plane was
approaching the runway the left engine
failed and the aircraft started rocking
and shaking the captain made an attempt
to restart the engine but didn't succeed
and still at 158 p.m. just 10 minutes
after the emergency and 35 minutes after
the takeoff Aloha Airlines flight 243
managed to touchdown on the runway of
Kahului Airport
landing a plane with such a huge loss of
integrity was an unprecedented feat to
stop the plane the crew used the reverse
thrust of the second still working
engine as soon as the plane stopped the
evacuation began everyone on the plane
except for the flight attendant who had
been pulled out of the plane was alive
although 65 people were injured
most people had been hurt by flying
debris and torn pieces of fuselage
unfortunately since nobody on the ground
had known how serious the situation was
no ambulances were waiting for the
injured the first one arrives seven
minutes after the plane landed and there
were only two ambulances on the island
which obviously couldn't fit all the
people that's why the passengers had to
be transported to the hospital in
several 15-passenger tour events that
belong to the company
Akamai tours luckily - Akamai drivers
used to be paramedics and they started
to help the injured right on the runway
meanwhile Airport mechanics as well as
office staff drove the vans to the
hospital which was three miles away
luckily there were only eight serious
injuries and all of these people later
recovered as for the plane it was
damaged beyond repair and later
dismantled right at the airport the
missing part of the roof disappeared
without a trace but what could cause
such a terrible accident the problem
wasn't the age of the aircraft after all
nineteen years isn't that all neither
had it accumulated too many flight hours
before the accident happened but the
thirty five thousand five hundred flight
hours the plane had travelled included
eighty nine thousand six hundred eighty
takeoffs and landings which are also
called flight cycles the reason for such
a huge number was that the plane
performed mostly short domestic flights
between the islands and this number
exceeded the number of flight cycles the
plane was designed for by two times
besides the airplane traveled in a salty
and humid environment which also added
to the wear and tear
interestingly during one interview that
followed the accident passenger Gayle
Yamamoto remembered that she had spotted
a crack in the fuselage when she was
boarding unfortunately she was the only
one who had seen this damage and the
woman hadn't thought that the crack was
important enough to inform the crew have
you ever heard about any other unusual
accidents that happened in the air if so
write about them in the comment section
below
remember to hit the like button share
this video with your friends and
subscribe to the channel to get to the
bright side of life